# The concept and properties of algorithms

## Concepts

> In mathematics and computer science, an algorithm (Listeni/ˈælɡərɪðəm/ al-gə-ri-dhəm) is a self-contained step-by-step set of operations to be performed. Algorithms exist that perform calculation, data processing, and automated reasoning.
> -- [Wikipedia][01]

## Properties

*Donald E. Knuth* defined five important features in his book *The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 1.*:

1. **Finiteness**. An algorithm must always terminate after a finite number of steps. (A procedure that has all of the characteristics of an algorithm except that it possibly lacks finiteness may be called a **computational method**.)

1. **Definiteness**. Each step of an algorithm must be precisely defined; the actions to be carried out must be rigorously and unambiguously specified for each case. (An expression of a computational method in a computer language is called a **program**).

1. **Input**. An algorithm has zero or more inputs: quantities that are given to it initially before the algorithm begins, or dynamically as the algorithm runs. These inputs are taken from specified sets of objects.

1. **Output**. An algorithm has one or more outputs: quantities that have a specified relation to the inputs.

1. **Effectiveness**. An algorithm is also generally expected to be effective, in the sense that its operations must all be sufficiently basic that they can in principle be done exactly and in a finite length of time by someone using pencil and parer.

## Informal comparison of algorithm efficiency (e.g., operation counts)

N/A

[01]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithm