# The role of algorithms in the problem-solving process

Most of the following contents refers to *Introduction to algorithms* by *Cormen, Thomas H*.

## Algorithm

### What kinds of problems are solved by algorithms?

* The Human Genome Project
    * Identifying all the 100,000 genes in human DNA
    * determining the sequences of the 3 billion chemical base pairs that make up human DNA
    * Storing DNA in databases
    * Developing tools for data analysis

* Internet
    * Finding good routes on which the data will travel
    * Using a search engine to quickly find pages on which particular information resides

* Electronic commerce
    * Public-key cryptography
    * Digital signatures
    * Notes: Those applications are based on numerical algorithms and number theory

* Manufacturing
    * An Internet service provider may wish to determine where to place additional resources in order to serve its customers more effectively. (Linear programming)

### Two characteristics that are common to many interesting algorithmic problems:

1. They have many candidate solutions, the overwhelming majority of which do not solve the problem at hand. Finding one that does, or one that is “best,” can present quite a challenge.

1. They have practical applications. Finding the shortest path provides the easiest examples. 
    * A transportation firm, such as a trucking or railroad company, has a financial interest in finding shortest paths through a road or rail network because taking shorter paths results in lower labor and fuel costs. 
    * A routing node on the Internet may need to find the shortest path through the network in order to route a message quickly.
    * A person wishing to drive from New York to Boston may want to find driving directions from an appropriate Web site, or she may use her GPS while driving.

## Algorithm as a technology

As the performance among different algorithms which solve the same problem differs significantly, we should consider algorithms, like computer hardware, as a **technology**.

Having a solid base of algorithmic knowledge and technique is one characteristic that separates the truly skilled programmers from the novices. With modern computing technology, you can accomplish some tasks without knowing much about algorithms, but with a good background in algorithms, you can do much, much more.